README.md, before:

<img src="assets/bao.png" alt="bao" width="100px">

# BaOS (Bourne again Operating System)

**BaOS** is a simple **x86 operating system** for managing **directories** and **text files**. It currently includes a **custom bootloader** written in assembly and a **C kernel** that runs a basic **shell** for file and directory management.

The kernel initializes a root directory `/` and supports storage with up to **32 directories** and **64 files**. **Text input and output** are handled via **VGA**, with scrolling and a simple prompt.

Thanks to a custom written **ATA PIO driver**, the entire **file system** is now **persistent on disk** across reboots, instead of being stored only in memory. The kernel uses a **custom file system** implementation for managing files and directories.

The bootloader loads the **kernel** from disk in real mode and then switches the CPU to **protected mode** before jumping to the C kernel, ensuring a **flat memory model**.

Future plans for BaOS include moving the **shell** to **ring 3**, integrating **user programs** like the **text editor "Filling"** and **calculator** (currently still part of the shell), and eventually developing a **graphical user interface (GUI)**.

## General architecture 🏛️

BaOS is structured in a clear hierarchical architecture that separates hardware management from user interaction. At the lowest level is the hardware, including the CPU, memory, and I/O devices. The kernel sits directly on top of the hardware and is responsible for all low-level management, including device I/O and the file system. It exposes its functionality to higher-level components through a set of C functions, which serve as a stable API.

<div align="center">
    <img src="assets/architecture.svg" alt="architecture">
</div>
</br>

The shell operates at the top of this hierarchy. It interacts with the user, parses input, and determines which kernel functions to invoke. The shell itself does not have direct access to the hardware and relies entirely on the kernel’s API to perform operations like reading/writing files, creating directories, or displaying system information. This separation ensures a clean modular design, where the kernel handles all hardware-specific logic and the shell focuses on user interaction and command processing.

## Getting started 🥟

### Requirements ⚠️

- **[NASM](https://www.nasm.us/)** – Netwide Assembler
- **[QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/)** – Quick EMUlator
- **[Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)** – GNU Build tool
- **[i686-elf-gcc](https://github.com/lordmilko/i686-elf-tools/releases)** - Cross compiler
- **[i686-elf-ld](https://github.com/lordmilko/i686-elf-tools/releases)** - Cross linker

### Build steps 🛠️

1. **Build the project:** Open a terminal in the project directory and run:

```bash
make
```

2. **Start the OS in QEMU:** After building, launch the OS with:

```bash
make run
```

After running this command, QEMU will launch your BaOS bootloader. 🏁

## Credits 🙏

- 🌐 <a href="https://www.flaticon.com/free-icons/xiao-long-bao" title="xiao long bao icons">Xiao long bao icons created by zero_wing - Flaticon</a>

_Happy coding!_ 🚀

Commit message:

Polished filling and calc. Filling now refuses to read binary files. Calc can now solve linear and general equations using numerical methods. Shell wrappers are now separate programs injected on disk. Way more scalable that way.

README.md, after:

<img src="assets/bao.png" alt="bao" width="100px">

# BaOS (Bourne again Operating System)

**BaOS** is a simple **x86 operating system** designed for managing **directories** and **text files**. It includes a custom bootloader written in assembly and a C kernel that runs a basic shell for file and directory management.

The kernel implements **paging** with **identity mapping**, which allows it to map virtual memory directly to physical memory for simplicity while still enforcing access restrictions. Kernel memory is protected with user/supervisor bits, ensuring that programs running in **ring 3** cannot accidentally or maliciously overwrite critical kernel data. This creates a safe boundary between kernel space and user space, providing the foundation for running untrusted user programs.

A custom **ELF loader** manages loading user programs into memory and performs a lightweight context switch, mainly adjusting stack-related values to transfer control to user space. All communication between user programs and the kernel happens through a **syscall API**, keeping the kernel isolated from direct user-level memory access.

BaOS comes with a **custom C runtime**, including `crt0` and supporting runtime libraries. It provides most of the standard ANSI C functionality and parts of some POSIX headers, allowing programs to rely on familiar C constructs while using custom syscalls under the hood. The system currently includes a **shell**, a **text editor** called **filling**, a **calculator** called **calc** capable of evaluating numerical expressions as well as linear and general equations using the Newton-Raphson method, and an early-stage C compiler called **baoc**. With Baoc, users can write programs directly in the text editor and compile them on the system.

A custom ATA PIO driver ensures the file system is **persistent across reboots**, rather than being stored only in memory. The bootloader loads the kernel in real mode and switches the CPU to protected mode, providing a flat memory model.

Looking forward, BaOS is planned to evolve into a more fully-featured system. The compiler will be extended to support more complex C features. One of the main goals is to develop a **graphical user interface (GUI)**, along with sound support, multitasking, and the ability to handle common file types such as images and audio.

Additionally, there are plans to implement a **TCP/IP stack**, which will enable networking features such as sending and receiving emails, making HTTP requests, and other network communications. Based on this networking layer, it will be possible to create a **package manager**, allowing the BaOS community to share and distribute their own programs.

These improvements aim to make BaOS a versatile, minimal, and safe operating system capable of running multiple user programs concurrently with persistent storage and a rich set of multimedia, UI, and networking capabilities.

## General architecture 🏛️

BaOS is structured in a clear hierarchical architecture that separates hardware management from user interaction. At the lowest level is the hardware, including the CPU, memory, and I/O devices. The kernel sits directly on top of the hardware and is responsible for all low-level management, including device I/O and the file system. It exposes its functionality to higher-level components through a set of C functions, which serve as a stable API.

<div align="center">
    <img src="assets/architecture.svg" alt="architecture">
</div>
</br>

The shell and user applications operate at the top of this hierarchy in **ring 3**, ensuring that they cannot access kernel memory or hardware directly. These programs use a custom **libc** runtime, which provides standard C functionality while translating requests into system calls that request services from the kernel. This layer allows user programs to perform operations such as reading and writing files, creating directories, or interacting with other system services, without breaking the separation between user space and kernel space. By keeping the shell and all user applications in ring 3, BaOS enforces security and stability while providing a flexible environment for program execution.

## Getting started 🥟

### Requirements ⚠️

- **[NASM](https://www.nasm.us/)** – Netwide Assembler
- **[QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/)** – Quick EMUlator
- **[Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)** – GNU Build tool
- **[i686-elf-gcc](https://github.com/lordmilko/i686-elf-tools/releases)** - Cross compiler
- **[i686-elf-ld](https://github.com/lordmilko/i686-elf-tools/releases)** - Cross linker

### Build steps 🛠️

1. **Build the project:** Open a terminal in the project directory and run:

```bash
make
```

2. **Start the OS in QEMU:** After building, launch the OS with:

```bash
make run
```

After running this command, QEMU will launch your BaOS bootloader. 🏁

## Credits 🙏

- 🌐 <a href="https://www.flaticon.com/free-icons/xiao-long-bao" title="xiao long bao icons">Xiao long bao icons created by zero_wing - Flaticon</a>

_Happy coding!_ 🚀
